Research Goals
The purpose of this research is to study the effect that time and circumstance 
may have with regards to references to God by Presidents of the United States 
in their Inaugural Addresses. From this data we hope to infer a larger understanding 
of the place of God and religion in American society over the past two hundred plus years.
We will attempt to answer questions such as whether supplications to God rise during periods
of national strife such as the Civil War, or the Great Depression. Has the amount of references
gone up since the founding of the Republic, gone down, or largely stayed the same?
In addition to these questions, we will seek to draw conclusions from each individual president’s 
background and their references to God. Who were the most religious presidents? What region 
of the country do these types of presidents come from? Do presidents of one party reference 
God more openly than those of another? These are the types of questions that we will attempt 
to answer with our research into the fifty-seven Presidential Inaugural Addresses.

Party Definitions
In an attempt to gain a better understanding of our results for both ourselves and prospective
viewers we thought it would be wise to provide a basic background for the various political 
parties which American presidents have belonged to over the years. Times change and what 
once was common knowledge with regards to what each political party stands for may no 
longer be widely understood. In addition to this, as times change it may be difficult 
to understand parties along the conservative-liberal paradigm that modern day Americans 
are most comfortable with. With this understanding taken into account we will attempt to 
provide a brief description of each of the political factions which a President of the United States has once belonged to.

Unaffiliated
Only one president, George Washington, is listed as unaffiliated in our classification of the presidents. 
Given Washington’s immense popularity following his success as Commander-in-Chief of the Continental Army 
in the Revolutionary War, he was elected unanimously in the Electoral College and never affiliated himself
with any political faction. However, many historians generally regard his policies as falling more in line
with those of the Federalist Party rather than that of the Democratic-Republicans.

Federalist
The very first political party to hold the office of the president was the Federalist Party. 
This party held control of the executive office from 1797 to 1801 during the presidency of John Adams.
As the name suggests, this party supported a federal approach to government with a strong central 
government capable of exerting authority over the individual state governments. Members of this 
party tended to hail from the northern states of New England and thus supported policies of 
industrialization and economic expansion.

Democratic-Republican
In 1801 the Democratic-Republicans came into power with the election of Thomas Jefferson 
to the White House. As the opposition party to the Federalists, this party tended to favor
the agrarian ways of the southern states over the industrialization of the North. In addition 
to this, the party supported a policy of decentralization and strong state governments over that of the Federal Government.
 
Democratic
The oldest party in the United States, the Democratic Party can trace its roots through the
election of Andrew Jackson in 1828 to Barack Obama today. Over the years the party has
changed to address the particular issues of the day and in many ways is completely 
opposite from its original positions. Initially, the Democratic Party was centered 
in the southern United States. As a successor the Democratic-Republicans,
this party stood for agrarianism, states’ rights, and strict adherence to the Constitution.
Over the years, this party has transformed to support a stronger federal government, and
a looser interpretation of Constitution. Today the Democratic Party stands for social
justice in the form of larger support for social programs which benefit minorities 
and the poor. They favor social liberalism in their support for female reproductive
rights, and the legalization of same-sex marriage. While this party once held its 
stronghold in what was known as the “Solid South,” since Lyndon Johnson’s signing 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 the party has 
been largely replaced in the south by the Republican Party.

Whig
The Whigs first elected a president of their party in 1840 with a victory of 
William Henry Harrison over the Democratic candidate President Martin Van Buren.
Following Harrison’s death only thirty-one days later and the succession of John 
Tyler as president, the Whigs attempted to implement their policies of a strong 
central government which would promote economic and industrial expansion of the 
United States. The Whigs supported government projects to create an inter-state 
road and canal system along with the implementation of a public school system. 
In many ways, the Whigs can be viewed as the successor party of the Federalists.
The Whigs failed to adequately address the issue of slavery and thus have not 
held the White House since Millard Fillmore left office in 1853.

Republican
The second party to have survived into the modern day, the Republican Party,
like the Democratic Party has needed to change its platform to address the 
issues of the day and thus is almost unrecognizable compared to its original
platform. The Republican Party was founded largely by Whigs who were disillusioned
with their party’s inability to come to a firm stance on the issue of slavery. 
Early members of the Republican Party were vehemently opposed to slavery which
led to the South’s secession when the Republican Party first took control of 
the White House in 1861 with the election of Abraham Lincoln. Following the
Civil War the Republican Party continued to advocate for the rights of African-Americans 
while also supporting a strong Federal Government along with economic and industrial growth.
During the initial years of the Great Depression, the Republican Party advocated for limited 
intervention in the economy and marginal support for the out of work. Thus, they were left 
out of office for twenty years during the presidencies of Franklin Roosevelt and Harry Truman.
The party came back into power in 1952 with the election of Dwight Eisenhower and today argues 
for a weaker central government in favor of states’ rights, limited intervention in the economy,
social conservatism, and a strong presence on the world stage.  
